Waste is an inevitable part of our lives. But imagine living in a world where all waste was properly sorted and disposed of. Recyclables go to the correct recycling facilities to be turned into new products. Organic waste goes to composting sites to be turned into an organic fertilizer that can be used by farms and gardens rather than going to the landfill where they produce methane, a greenhouse gas 30x more potent than carbon dioxide. Unfortunately, we don’t live in that world.

Studies from the University of Southern Indiana show that in America alone, 75% of waste is recyclable. However, only about 30% actually gets recycled. Despite investing $200 billion in the recycling industry, these percentages has not increased within the past 20 years. This is a big issue since Americans make up 5% of the world’s population but generate 40% of world’s waste while utilizing ¼ of the world’s natural resources. For a country that produces large amounts of waste, there isn’t much improvements made in terms of recycling habits. The negative effects of this consists of large amounts of landfill, pollution, and the need for more natural resources. 

A large part of the problem is that most people aren’t taught how to separate their waste beyond paper, cardboard, plastic, glass, and cans. For one, there are different types of plastic, some of which can’t be recycled in typical recycling facilities. Food waste is another type of waste that many people throw in the trash which is sent to landfills where it produces methane as opposed to being composted. There are specialty recycling programs for things like e-waste, contact lens cases, and many other items which most people don’t even know exist or where the drop off locations are.

Our team wants to build a waste classifier that will serve as an interactive learning tool by teaching people to sort waste. It will consist of a Raspberry Pi, camera, and touchscreen. Using computer vision and machine learning, it will be able to capture an image of an item and output if the object scanned either compost, paper, plastic, glass, metal or garbage. It will also have buttons that people can click on to learn more about  waste separation and the recycling and compost processes and a map that shows the nearest drop off location.

9 out of 10 people said they would recycle if it were “easier”, and that is what we plan on doing. Additionally, since one of the main causes for poor recycling is the lack of knowledge on how to recycle, we decided to create a product that would educate and ensure that waste is placed in the correct category. This would be our goal for the entire quarter.
Our steps would be to 
By simply holding their waste in front of a camera, our product can instruct the user where to place their waste and educate them one step at a time.  
